readme/contributing.md, before:

[< Back](../README.md)
---

## Contributing

At this early stage, please discuss with [#connect-dps-devs](https://moj.enterprise.slack.com/archives/C04JFG3QJE6) in
the first instance.

We are trialling out grouping permissions by domain where possible (following the 'HMPPS Domains' Miro diagram). This is
to avoid one big unwieldy collection of permissions at the top level of the permissions object.

Adding a new permission involves the following:

1) Finding the appropriate domain (or creating a new one) in `src/types/public/permissions/domains/...`
2) Add the permission to the relevant domain enum,
   e.g. [PrisonerMoneyPermissions.ts](../src/types/public/permissions/domains/prisonerSpecific/prisonerMoney/PrisonerMoneyPermissions.ts)
3) Add the permission path to the relevant path object,
   e.g. [PrisonerMoneyPermissionPaths.ts](../src/types/public/permissions/domains/prisonerSpecific/prisonerMoney/PrisonerMoneyPermissionPaths.ts)
4) Add a folder under `src/services/permissions/checks/domains/...` for the new permission check. This should include
   the
   check, a unit test and a scenarios file. The scenarios can be built up with the builders and help to verify
   the end-to-end permission check works ok.
5) Using the above scenarios for the permission, add a test
   to [PermissionsService.test.ts](../src/services/permissions/PermissionsService.test.ts)
6) Consider adding to a service's [contract tests](../src/contractTests) if the service is to start making use of the
   new permission.

Commit message:

CDPS-1712: Introducing prisoner schedule read permission (#89)
* CDPS-1712: Refactor to make permissions logic simpler to reason about

* CDPS-1712: Further refactor using currying to reduce boilerplate

* CDPS-1712: Refactor of tests

* CDPS-1712: Introducing prisoner schedule read permission

readme/contributing.md, after:

[< Back](../README.md)
---

## Contributing

At this early stage, please discuss with [#connect-dps-devs](https://moj.enterprise.slack.com/archives/C04JFG3QJE6) in
the first instance.

We are trialling out grouping permissions by domain where possible (following the 'HMPPS Domains' Miro diagram). This is
to avoid one big unwieldy collection of permissions at the top level of the permissions object.

Adding a new permission involves the following:

1) Finding the appropriate domain (or creating a new one) in `src/types/public/permissions/domains/...`
2) Add the permission to the relevant domain enum,
   e.g. [PrisonerMoneyPermissions.ts](../src/types/public/permissions/domains/prisonerSpecific/prisonerMoney/PrisonerMoneyPermissions.ts)
3) Add the permission path to the relevant path object,
   e.g. [PrisonerMoneyPermissionPaths.ts](../src/types/public/permissions/domains/prisonerSpecific/prisonerMoney/PrisonerMoneyPermissionPaths.ts)
4) Add a folder under `src/services/permissions/checks/domains/...` for the new permission check. This should include
   the check and a scenarios file. The scenarios can be built up with the builders and help to verify the end-to-end
   permission check works ok.
5) Using the above scenarios for the permissions, create a test for the domain level permission check in the relevant
   domain test file,
   e.g. [PrisonerMoneyPermissionChecks.test.ts](../src/services/permissions/checks/domains/prisonerSpecific/prisonerMoney/PrisonerMoneyCheck.test.ts)
6) Consider adding to a service's [contract tests](../src/contractTests) if the service is to start making use of the
   new permission.
7) If creating a new domain or domain group, there will be some additional plumbing to do to wire it all up. It is all
   strongly typed so the TypeScript compiler will help identify what needs to be done.
